New page: aria-owns (#10892)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/accessibility/aria/attributes/aria-owns/index.md

An 'owning element' is any DOM ancestor of an element. If an element visually, functionally, or contextually appears to 'own', (be an ancestor of) an element, but doesn't actually 'own' the element in the DOM, include the `aria-owns` to create that relationship. Add the attribute to the owning element with reference to the non-child owned element (or elements) to tell assistive technology that an element should be treated as a child. 

We create this owning relationship and enable any element to 'own' any element with the `aria-owns` attribute, by referencing the ID of one or more elements to be owned. The value of the `aria-owns` attribute is a space-separated ID reference list that references one or more elements in the document by ID.

An 'owned element' is any DOM descendant of the element, any element specified as a child via `aria-owns`, or any DOM descendant of the owned child. The `aria-owns` owned element should be an element that is separate in the DOM but should be treated as a child of the current element.

Do not use `aria-owns` as a replacement for the DOM hierarchy. If the relationship is represented in the DOM, do not use `aria-owns`.

> A child element is owned by it's DOM parent by default: in this case, `aria-owns` should not be used.  While the `aria-owns` attribute can be used to rearrange existing child elements into a different order, this should be avoided. While it may be tempting to order the accessibility layer to match order changes created with the CSS {{CSSXref('order')}} property, avoiding both the `order` property and the `aria-owns` attribute is the best option. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A child element is owned by it's DOM parent by default: in this case, `aria-owns` should not be used. Avoid using the `aria-owns` attribute to rearrange existing child elements into a different order. While it may be tempting to order the accessibility layer to match order changes created with the CSS {{CSSXref('order')}} property, avoiding both the `order` property and the `aria-owns` attribute is the best option. 
```

When using `aria-owns`, make sure you manage focus order. Ensure the visual focus order matches this assistive technology reading order. 

As an example of when to use `aria-owns` includes pop-up sub-menus that visually appear positioned near a parent menu, but cannot be nested in the DOM within the parent menu because it would affect the visual presentation. In this case, use `aria-owns` to present the sub-menu as a child of the parent menu to a screen reader.

> **Note:** The `aria-owns` attribute should only be used when the relationship cannot be determined from the DOM. 

> If an element has both `aria-owns` and DOM children then the order of the child elements is the actual DOM children first, then the elements referenced in `aria-owns`. This order can be changed by including the ID references to the actual DOM children in the `aria-owns` value. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If an element has both `aria-owns` and DOM children, the order of the child elements:

 1. The actual DOM children first, 
 2. Then the elements referenced in `aria-owns`. 
 
 This order can be changed by including the ID references to the actual DOM children in the `aria-owns` value. 
```

## Description

Every element is the parent, sibling or child of another element. The document object, made up of HTML elements and text nodes, is the basis of the DOM tree. The Accessibility Object Model (<abbr>AOM</abbr>) relies on a well-built DOM to enable assistive technologies (AT) to relay meaningful information about a documents contents to users. 

There are circumstances where the layout that appears on screen may differ from the underlying DOM structure, due to the ability of JavaScript to alter content and CSS to alter layout. When this is the case, the `aria-owns` attribute can be used to recreate a meaningful relationship for assistive technology that consumes the DOM.

When elements visually seem to be related but are not associated in the DOM, the `aria-owns` attribute enables creating the relationship that appears on screen in the accessibility layer for use by assistive technology. The **only** reason to include `aria-owns` is to expose a parent/child contextual relationship to assistive technology when the DOM's construction can't provide that relationship. 

> An "owning element" is any DOM ancestor of an element. If an element visually, functionally, or contextually appears to "own" (be an ancestor of) an element, but doesn't actually "own" the element in the DOM, include the `aria-owns` to create that relationship. Add the attribute to the owning element with reference to the non-child owned element (or elements) to tell assistive technology that an element should be treated as a child. 

Reviewer: @estelle Can we rephrase this paragraph? I think we may use to need synonyms for the word "owns" here, in that it gets confusing determining the difference between inherited ownership and programmatically assigned ownership.

Author: done

Referencing the ID of one or more elements allows any element to "own" any other element with an `aria-owns` delcaration. The value of the `aria-owns` attribute is a space-separated ID reference list that references the IDs of one or more elements in the document.

> **Note:** An "owned" element is any DOM descendant of the element, any element specified as a child via `aria-owns`, or any DOM descendant of the owned child. The `aria-owns`-owned element should be an element that belongs to a separate parent tree in the DOM but should be treated as a child of the current element.

Do not use `aria-owns` as a replacement for the DOM hierarchy. If the relationship is represented in the DOM, do not use `aria-owns`.

> A child element is owned by it's DOM parent by default: in this case, `aria-owns` should not be used. Avoid using the `aria-owns` attribute to rearrange existing child elements into a different order. While it may be tempting to order the accessibility layer to match order changes created with the CSS {{CSSXref('order')}} property, avoiding both the `order` property and the `aria-owns` attribute is the best option. 

Reviewer: @estelle The mentioning of CSS layout adjustment here is a surprise. Can we rephrase this paragraph, or possibly put up some content earlier to mention that CSS can make modifications or content ordering?

> When using `aria-owns`, make sure you manage focus order. Ensure the visual focus order matches this assistive technology reading order. 

Reviewer: @estelle Do you think we should link to a resource on how to manage focus order here? It might be a new concept for a reader unfamiliar with ARIA/accessibility.
